The Project Gutenberg eBook of Behind the scenes in a restaurant, by
The Consumers' League of New York City

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Behind the scenes in a restaurant
       A study of 1017 women restaurant employees

Author: The Consumers' League of New York City

Release Date: November 30, 2022 [eBook #69451]

Language: English

Produced by: ellinora and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEHIND THE SCENES IN A
RESTAURANT ***






                          Behind the Scenes in a
                                Restaurant

                     A Study of 1017 Women Restaurant
                                Employees

                                    By
                  The Consumers’ League of New York City
                                   1916




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


                                                                      PAGE

     1. FOREWORD                                                         1

     2. PLAN OF STUDY                                                    3

     3. THE WORKER                                                       6

          Age                                                            6

          Nationality                                                    8

          Family and Home                                               10

     4. HOURS                                                           12

          Weekly Hours of Labor                                         12

          The Day of a Restaurant Worker                                15

          Night Work and One Day’s Rest in Seven                        17

          The Long-day Workers                                          19

     5. WAGES                                                           20

          Weekly Wages                                                  20

          The Tipping System                                            23

          Irregularity of Employment                                    25

          Lack of Opportunity in Restaurant Work                        26

     6. SUMMARY OF STUDY                                                27

     7. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEGISLATIVE AMENDMENT                       29

     8. APPENDIX I.—A Statement from the Labor Department of the
          State of New York Advocating the Limitation of Hours of
          Work for Restaurant Employees                                 31

     9. APPENDIX II.—Extracts from a Tentative Report on the Physical
          Condition of Women Employees in Restaurants, Based on a
          Study Conducted by the Occupational Clinic of the Health
          Department of the City of New York                            33

    10. APPENDIX III.—Restaurant Work from a Worker’s Point of View     35

    11. APPENDIX IV.—Schedule Used                                      37

    12. APPENDIX V.—Tables                                              39

    13. APPENDIX VI.—State Laws Regulating Work of Women Employed
          in Restaurants                                                47




[Illustration: WANTED—A REST]




FOREWORD.


“I keep hearing about laws for women. Where are they?” This was the
question asked by a woman working twelve hours a day in a restaurant.
What must we tell her? What excuse have we to offer for excluding her
from the protection the law gives to women working in factories and
mercantile establishments? That we have safeguarded women in these fields
of employment from overwork proves that we know the dangers of overwork,
that long hours interpreted in terms of human life mean exhaustion,
disease, immorality, pauperism and a weaker generation to follow our own.
This is an old story, it has been told again and again. Yet with our
over-sensitiveness to an encroachment upon the rights and liberties of
American citizens, we have failed to extend the protection of our laws to
all who need their protection.

The New York State Labor Law as it stands makes it illegal to employ
women in factories and mercantile establishments more than fifty-four
hours or six days in any one week, or between ten o’clock at night and
six o’clock in the morning. So far, so good. If these laws are enforced,
we may feel fairly confident that women in these branches of industry
at least have some measure of protection. But what of the women not
safeguarded by the law? Who are they, and why should they be neglected?

Between fifteen and twenty thousand of these women are workers in
restaurants—waitresses, cooks, kitchen girls, pantry hands—upon whose
services all of us depend at one time or another for our comfort and
pleasure. The Consumers’ League of New York City has long felt the need
of including restaurant workers under the provisions of the Labor Law.
The State Department of Labor lays special stress upon this need.[1]
Believing, therefore, both from casual observation and from the statement
of the Labor Department that women in restaurants are not properly
guarded from industrial strain, the League planned to explore the field
further, to discover just what actually are the hours, wages and general
conditions of work in this branch of industry and to learn their effect
upon the life and health of the worker.

A valuable study of this subject was made in 1910 by the United States
Bureau of Labor Statistics for New York and several of the larger cities
of the country.[2] Though the Consumers’ League has not entered upon
wholly new ground, yet with adequate time for detailed study it has
been possible for it to make a more exhaustive inquiry than any made
heretofore, and to bring to light new phases of the question. The story
of its discoveries is told in the pages that follow, to this end, that
with wider knowledge of facts, public interest may be reawakened and
stimulated to demand adequate legal protection for women employed in
restaurants.




PLAN OF STUDY.


Believing that one of the most satisfactory sources of information in
regard to labor conditions is the word of the workers themselves, the
Consumers’ League decided to base its study mainly upon interviews with
restaurant employees. One thousand and seventeen (1,017) women were
interviewed in New York City and in six of the larger cities of the
State. They were seen in their homes, at their places of employment and
through employment agencies.

In New York City all the interviews were held at the Occupational Clinic
of the Board of Health, where, through the courtesy of Dr. Harris, Chief
of the Bureau of Industrial Hygiene, a room was set aside for the use
of the League investigator. In response to a requirement of the Health
Department, all food-handlers in the city come to the Clinic for a
physical examination and certificate testifying that they are free from
communicable disease. The investigator could in this way meet the women
on neutral ground when there was no temptation to conceal or distort
facts, and talk confidentially with them. The interviews taken at the
Clinic in five months would have required at least a year to get in any
other way.

The New York State Consumers’ League and the branch leagues in Buffalo,
Syracuse and Mr. Vernon co-operated in interviewing women in localities
outside of New York City, and the same undesirable conditions were found
to prevail throughout the State.

Supplementary information was also obtained from all other available
sources, such as employers, employment agencies, girls’ clubs and
published reports. The workers came from every kind of restaurant,
including hotels, tea-rooms, buffet and dairy lunches, cafeterias and
clubs. In this way it was possible to get in touch with a thoroughly
representative group of workers, including the best paid as well as the
most underpaid.

In undertaking the investigation, the League sought to answer three
questions: first, what are the actual conditions of labor prevailing in
the restaurants of New York State; second, are these conditions such that
the worker may lead a wholesome, normal life; and third, how do these
conditions react through the individual worker upon society as a whole.

    The Consumers’ League acknowledges its deep indebtedness to Dr.
    Harris for the helpful interest that he has taken in its work,
    and for his courtesy in allowing the League investigator to
    take interviews at the Occupational Clinic.

[Illustration: The Normal Working Day—Eight Hours.

A Common Occurrence—Fifteen Hours.]

There is no class of employees who serve the public so directly as do
restaurant workers. Also, it is obviously of vital interest to the public
that those who serve them in this way be strong and healthy since they
are in a position peculiarly adapted to spread disease. The study just
terminated has brought to light certain facts which point to a grave
danger to the individual worker, to those whom she serves and to the
community. Hard work kept up for incredibly long hours, low pay, health
impaired and resistance to disease lowered through fatigue—these are some
of the facts which make action on our part necessary, that restaurant
work may be a safe and wholesome occupation.




THE WORKER.


AGE.

An outstanding feature of restaurant work is the presence in this
occupation of a very large proportion of girls and young women.
One-fourth of all the workers are under 21, and two-thirds under 30 years
of age. (See Diagram 1). There are several reasons to account for this
fact.

A certain amount of excitement attaches to the work of a restaurant
waitress which appeals to young girls. She sees and talks to a great
many people; she likes the noise and bustle and cheerful atmosphere of
the dining room. Also, the employer prefers young and pretty girls as
waitresses, especially where the customers are mostly men. They help to
make his place attractive and popular. One waitress remarked, “When the
girls get to looking bad, they are laid off and someone else is put in
their place.”

As might be expected, restaurant cooks are a somewhat older set of women
than the waitresses, not quite one-half being under 30 years. Their work
requires experience and the ability to think and plan. Considering the
nature and demands of the work, it is startling to find that twenty per
cent. of their number are girls not yet 21 years old.

Over seventy-five per cent. of the kitchen girls and other helpers[3] are
under 30, and nearly half under 21. This is the youngest group. Their
work needs no skill or previous training, the chief requirement being
physical strength.

The youth of these restaurant workers gives rise to two distinct dangers,
a physical danger and a moral one. Restaurant work necessarily involves
many hours of standing and walking, lifting and carrying heavy weights.
This is an unavoidable feature, but it is of the utmost importance that
it be not ignored. Medical authorities have pointed out the serious
results that follow the strain of continued standing and over-work
of young girls. Dr. Harris states that in occupations which require
such lifting and carrying and such long hours of standing “there is a
definite hazard to the child-bearing capacity of women. This is of vital
consequence to society as a whole.”

[Illustration:

  +--------------------------------------+
  |                                      |
  | All workers UUUUUUXXXXXXXXXXOOOOOOOO |
  | Waitresses  UUUUXXXXXXXXXXXXOOOOOOOO |
  | Cooks       UUUUUXXXXXXXOOOOOOOOOOOO |
  | Helpers     UUUUUUUUUUUXXXXXXXOOOOOO |
  |                                      |
  +--------------------------------------+

  _KEY_
  U under 21 yrs.
  X 21 and under 30 yrs.
  O 30 yrs. and over

DIAGRAM 1.—Ages of Women Employed in Restaurants by Occupation.]

The moral danger of the work is largely confined to waitresses. Because
of their position, they are peculiarly exposed to the attentions of men
customers. For this very reason, the Baltimore Vice Commission recommends
that only older and more experienced women be employed in this capacity,
while in Norway the law sets a minimum age limit for waitresses in public
places.

If the restaurant worker is to resist the strain of the work and the
temptations to which she is exposed, hours and conditions must be so
adjusted as to prevent all overtaxing of her strength and elasticity.

[Illustration: 

  +-----------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                                 |
  | American           |XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 33%       |
  | Austro-Hungarian   |XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 39% |
  | English & Canadian |XXX 3%                                      |
  | German             |XXXXXXXX 8%                                 |
  | Irish              |XXXXXXX 7%                                  |
  | Polish             |XX 2%                                       |
  | Russian            |XXXX 4%                                     |
  | Other              |XXXX 4%                                     |
  |                                                                 |
  +-----------------------------------------------------------------+

DIAGRAM 2.—Nationality of Women Restaurant Workers.]


NATIONALITY.

The majority of restaurant workers are foreigners. Less than one-third
are American-born, and of these a great many have foreign-born parents
and live among members of their own race, so that they can hardly
be classed as Americans. The largest single group is made up of
Austro-Hungarians. (See Diagram 2). The demand for cheap, unskilled labor
in this occupation calls for the kind of service which these girls and
others of the European peasant class can give. The outdoor life in the
fields of their native land fits them for the hard labor required in a
restaurant kitchen. They do not remain fit long, however. After a year or
two of this work, much of their sturdiness is lost, color and brightness
are gone from their faces, and they have become pale and listless. A
curiously dull, passive look is characteristic of many of them.

Living as they do among their own people these young peasants have no
opportunity to absorb American standards and customs. Their ignorance
makes it easy for employers to exploit them, demanding hours of labor
and paying wages to which no American girl would submit. An employment
agent said: “My ’phone rings day and night—all want peasant girls for
kitchen helpers because they are the only kind that will stand such long
hours.” Attempts to organize restaurant workers in New York State have
never succeeded. The Secretary of the Hotel and Restaurant Employees’
International Alliance, speaking of their unsuccessful efforts along
this line in New York City in 1915, says, “This is not the first attempt
to organize the girls. We have had a similar experience before,—in fact
have had three experiences in that city and none of them a bit more
encouraging than the present one.” This is largely due to the presence
of so great a number of young foreign girls in this occupation. They are
not in a position to unite and work for their own protection. The only
channel through which that protection can come is the law.

[Illustration:

  +---------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                   |
  | XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 45% |
  | RRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR 21%                         |
  | FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF 16%                              |
  | MMMMMMMMMMMMMM 14%                                |
  | PPPP 4%                                           |
  |                                                   |
  +---------------------------------------------------+

  _KEY_
  X family
  R relatives
  F friends
  M furnished room
  P proprietor

DIAGRAM 3.—Living Condition of Women Employed in Restaurants.]

[Illustration:

  +-----------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                           |
  | SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS 53% |
  | MMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMM 33%                               |
  | WWWWWWWWWWW 11%                                           |
  | DDD 3%                                                    |
  |                                                           |
  +-----------------------------------------------------------+

  _KEY_
  S single
  M married
  W widowed
  D divorced

DIAGRAM 4.—Marital Condition of Women Employed in Restaurants.]


FAMILY AND HOME.

While the greater number of restaurant workers are unmarried, it is
rather surprising to find so large a proportion of married women in the
work. (See Diagram 4.) This is easily explained, however, by the fact
that many of them are “one-meal” girls, that is, they are employed only
for the rush hour at noon. In this way they can earn a little extra money
while their husbands are at work, either as “pin-money” for themselves,
or to help toward the support of the children.

The majority of restaurant employees live with their family or relatives
(See Diagram 3), but this does not mean that they are not entirely
self-dependent. As large a proportion of a girl’s wage goes into
the family exchequer as she would have to pay for board and lodging
elsewhere. The financial advantage of living at home appears chiefly in
giving her a place of refuge when she is out of a job.

Restaurant workers are a tenement house population. A few, to be sure,
can afford comfortable little apartments of their own, but as a whole
their lot falls within the congested tenement districts of the city.
Confusion, over-crowding, dirt, lack of sunlight, air and privacy, and
unwholesome surroundings are only too common in their homes. The janitor
of an East Side tenement house said: “A little while ago down in Third
Street there were twenty-three girls sleeping in two rooms. They’d put
their mattresses down on the floor at night and pile them on top of each
other in the day time. Most of them were kitchen hands at ⸺’s,” naming a
well-known chain of restaurants.

The low standards of the European peasant class from which restaurant
workers are largely recruited, drag down all standards. No other result
is possible under present conditions. They live—but how? Low wages,
miserably long hours, no opportunity to fit themselves for their new
surroundings—this is what we offer these young peasant girls who come to
America confidently expecting better things than they have left behind.




HOURS.


WEEKLY HOURS OF LABOR.

The salient characteristic of restaurant work is the length of the
working day. Fifty-eight per cent. of the women employees work each week
beyond the fifty-four-hour limit set by law for women in stores and
factories. A twelve-hour day and a seven-day week is the lot of one-fifth
of these workers. (See Diagram 5.) A fifteen-hour day is not uncommon.
Not quite one-half of the waitresses work over 54 hours a week or 9 hours
a day. The reason for this is that a large number of them, 31 per cent.,
are “one-meal girls.” _Seventy-eight per cent._ of all other restaurant
workers, however, exceed the fifty-four hour week.

Comparing the hours of labor of these women with the hours of labor of
all employees, both male and female, in the factories of New York State,
four per cent. of the factory employees and thirty-five per cent. of the
women restaurant employees work over sixty hours a week. Two per cent. of
the factory employees and twenty per cent. of the women in restaurants
work seventy-two hours or over.[4]

[Illustration:

  +------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                      |
  | all employees in factories      UXXOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO |
  | female employees in restaurants UUUUUXXXXOOOOOOOOOOO |
  |                                                      |
  +------------------------------------------------------+

  _KEY_
  U 72 hours and over
  X over 60 and under 72 hours
  O 60 hours and under

DIAGRAM 6.—Comparison of Weekly Hours of Labor for Women in Restaurants
and all Factory Employees in New York State.]

Shorter hours have been brought about in factories by the voluntary
action of manufacturers, who recognize the inefficiency of over-worked
men and women; by concerted action of the workers, who have united to
fight for their own protection; and by legal enactment, proving that
the people of New York State are alive to the dangers of overwork.
Some restaurant managers realize the waste and harm of too long hours
and arrange their employees’ time accordingly; most of them do not.
Women restaurant workers in New York State have never been successfully
organized; they cannot protect themselves. They have no legal redress
for overwork; the law has neglected them. In the course of this
investigation, a girl of twenty was found working one hundred and
twenty-two hours a week—longer than the law allows factory employees
to work in two weeks. Yet this is within the law. Although restaurants
differ from stores and factories in keeping open more hours a day, and
sometimes for the whole twenty-four, a system of shifts would do away
with the scandalously long hours to which thousands of girls and women
are bound.

[Illustration:

  +--------------------------------------------+
  |                                            |
  | under 15 hrs.      X 1%                    |
  | 15 and under 25    XXXXXXXX 8%             |
  | 25 and under 35    XXXXXXXXXXX 11%         |
  | 35 and under 45    XXXXXX 6%               |
  | 45 and under 55    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 16%    |
  | 55 and under 65    DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD 19% |
  | 65 and under 75    DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD 18%  |
  | 75 and under 85    DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD 16%    |
  | 85 and under 95    WWW 3%                  |
  | 95 and under 105   W 1%                    |
  | 105 hrs. and over  W 1%                    |
  |                                            |
  +--------------------------------------------+

  _KEY_
  X 54 hrs. and under
  D over 54 and under 85
  W 85 hrs. and over

DIAGRAM 5.—Weekly Hours of Labor of Women Employed in Restaurants.]

That restaurant work is at best a great drain upon the physical strength
and nervous force of the worker is evident. Standing, walking, lifting
and carrying heavy weights is unavoidable. The report on restaurants made
by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics says: “There was much
complaint among the waitresses that the work was very hard and they could
stand it but a few years. A number of the girls interviewed had worked as
three meal girls until their health was broken; then they took positions
as one meal girls and barely made a living. Carrying the heavy trays and
the constant standing and walking cause ill health. Usually a man is
employed to carry away the empty dishes, but the waitresses must bring
the trays loaded with food.”[5]

Besides the cost to endurance, nerves are at constant tension for hurry
is the remorseless rule. A waitress must not only remember a multitude
of orders and fill them quickly, but she must keep her temper under the
exactions of the most trying customer. The cook must keep her head amid
the confusion and noise of a hot, crowded kitchen. The kitchen girl must
be everywhere at once with a helping hand and the dish-washer’s very job
depends upon her quickness. One of this latter group said that she washes
seven thousand articles in an hour and a half. A waitress, when asked
the effect of the work upon her, answered, “Sore feet and a devilish
mean disposition.” A man restaurant worker speaking of kitchen girls
remarked, “It’s no work for a woman. They have to lift heavy pots full
of vegetables and fill in all the gaps. A man has some endurance, but a
woman can’t stand it more than nine hours a day.”

Many kinds of work are difficult and taxing in their performance, but if
the working day is not prolonged beyond a certain point, and there is a
sufficient period of rest, such work is not necessarily injurious to the
health of the worker. If this point is passed, health is impaired.

[Illustration: A MOVIE OF THE RESTAURANT WORKER

     I 7 A.M. The Waitress arrives—15 minutes for breakfast
    II 7.15 to 10 A.M. Customers must be served
   III 10 to 12 A.M. She sorts, folds and polishes
    IV 12 to 3 P.M. With heavy trays she walks about five miles
     V 3 to 5 P.M. “Free” and nowhere to go
    VI 5 to 8 P.M. Carrying trays and walking many miles
   VII 9 P.M. Exhausted—Home and to bed
  VIII 6 A.M. The daily grind begins again

HER PROGRAM FOR ELEVEN HOURS A DAY! SEVEN DAYS A WEEK!]


THE DAY OF A RESTAURANT WORKER.

The day of a restaurant worker does not begin with her arrival at
the restaurant nor end when she leaves. Half of these women live at
a distance, taking thirty minutes or more to reach their place of
employment. When this extra hour spent in going to and from work is
added to a twelve hour day, it is a factor to be reckoned with. It means
cutting off an already insufficient night’s rest, and, when a girl cannot
afford carfare, a weary walk home after being on her feet all day. Nor
is this all. Only a few of the best-paid waitresses can afford to pay
for the laundering of their aprons and uniforms. Consequently this must
be done by the girl herself, adding another burden to a load already too
heavy.

The law requires that girls in factories and stores have at least
one-half hour off for luncheon. This does not apply to restaurant
workers. The “one-meal” girls eat before and after serving, but the
majority of the “two-meal” and full-time girls have no time at all for
meals. They must eat when they can snatch a moment from their work.
There were many complaints of indigestion and loss of appetite from the
workers as a result of haste and irregularity in taking their meals. One
girl remarked, “You’re glad to grab ’em any way you can round here,” and
another said, “It’s a wonder more girls aren’t dead, the way they eat all
of a rush. Often the smell of food all the time takes away my appetite so
I can’t eat any way.”

A regular time off for meals would be of great benefit to the worker
not only in allowing her to eat quietly and comfortably, but in giving
her a little rest. In some restaurants after the noon rush is over the
girls can sit down and do “side-work,” folding napkins, polishing silver,
filling salt-cellars, etc. The greater number of girls, however, have no
so-called “idle time.” They must be on their job continuously. In other
restaurants the girls work on a “split trick,” that is, they have one or
two hours off in the afternoon. This is a very unpopular arrangement. Not
only does it keep them out late in the evening, but they cannot use their
free time to good advantage. There is little opportunity for recreation
or social intercourse during these hours because they come in the morning
or afternoon when the girls’ friends are all at work. Nor is there
ordinarily time for fresh air and exercise, especially in the case of the
kitchen workers. A waitress usually has only to take off her apron to
be ready for the street, but the other women have not time to change to
street clothes and back again in their free period. They stay in the hot
kitchen because no other place is provided.

Up at six, away at 6:30, home at 8 o’clock at night worn out by the wear
and tear of twelve hours’ toil, a dress and an apron to be washed and
ironed for tomorrow—after a day like this, what spirit or strength is
left to a girl for play and the friendly relations that safeguard her
from moral danger? It is a significant fact that with few exceptions
the restaurant worker is not known to settlements and girls’ clubs. She
does not share the group interests and social life open to other working
girls. Neither does she make friends with her fellow-workers—the spring
and vitality needed to win and establish friendships has been lost under
the deadening effect of overwork.

According to Miss Mary Van Kleeck’s estimate in her study of “Working
Girls in Evening Schools,” less than one per cent. of those attending
were restaurant workers. They simply have not the physical strength
for outside activities and interests. Time after time in answer to the
question “What do you do in the evening?” came the reply, “Oh, I go right
to bed.” One girl, who left the work because of broken health, said, “If
I went out in the evening I’d be sick the next day, and the boss would
say I couldn’t expect to do good work if I stayed out late at night.”

The report on restaurants of the Chicago Juvenile Protective Association,
emphasizes a truth too much ignored when it says: “The entire
investigation revealed once more the hideous risks of the excessively
fatigued and overworked girl, who is able to obtain the rest and comfort
she craves only through illicit channels.”[6]

[Illustration: Restaurant Kitchen Opening on Row of Toilets.

Loaned by the Tenement House Department of the City of New York.]


NIGHT WORK AND ONE DAY’S REST IN SEVEN.

Although the number of women employed in restaurants at night is not
great, night work in this occupation is a factor to be seriously
considered. The restaurants which employ women at night are the small
establishments in the tenement districts of the city where hours are
longest and surroundings most trying; the cheaper restaurants in the
theatre districts where the employment of women is an added attraction
to after-the-theatre supper parties; and restaurants in railway stations
which are necessarily open all night.

The law makes it illegal to employ women in factories and mercantile
establishments between 10 p. m. and 6 a. m. The reasons which caused the
state to exercise its police power to safeguard the health and morals
of these classes of workers apply equally to the employment of women
in restaurants. The very fact that only four per cent. of the workers
interviewed were employed at night proves that night work for women
in restaurants is not a necessary evil. That it is an evil is beyond
question.

The dangers of night work are two-fold. First, it is a distinct menace
to the health of the worker. The Factory Investigating Commission in
its Report to the Legislature for 1913, states: “The chief danger to
health from night work is ... due to the inevitable lack of sleep and
sunlight. Recuperation from fatigue takes place fully only in sleep,
and best in sleep at night. Hence night work is, in a word, against
nature. This injury to health is all the greater because sleep lost at
night by working women is never fully made up by day. For, in the first
place, sleep in the day time is not equal in recuperative power to sleep
at night.... Moreover, quiet and privacy for sleep by day is almost
impossible to secure. Upon returning home in the middle of the night or
at dawn the workers can snatch at most only a few hours’ rest.”

Often a woman will have one week of night work alternating with a week of
work in the day time. She hardly gets accustomed to sleeping by day when
she is taken off the night shift, to change back again at the end of the
week. Thus it is impossible for her to form regular habits in sleeping
and eating.

Secondly, there is a grave moral danger involved in night work,
especially for restaurant workers since at this time they are open to
the attentions of an undesirable class of men. “I don’t like to work at
night,” one young waitress said. “The men are always fresher to girls
at night than in the day time. Perhaps it’s because so many of those
gamblers come in drunk.” Nor is it safe for a woman to go home alone
after twelve o’clock at night. Instances of hideous occurrences are
familiar to everyone. A little widow, the mother of seven children, told
the investigator that she had given up her work as a dishwasher for this
very reason. A friend of hers working in a nearby restaurant, was set
upon, robbed and killed on her way home from work late one night. “I
changed my work then,” said the woman, “for what would the children do if
anything happened to me?”

The majority of restaurants employ men for night duty. It is evident,
therefore, that the employment of women is not essential to the
convenience and comfort of either restaurant owners or customers.

In nearly every branch of industry the working week is six days long.
It is universally conceded that there must be one day in the seven for
rest and relaxation if men and women are to give their best service. With
restaurant workers, thirty-three per cent. of whom have no day of rest
in seven, the need for such a time is particularly great because of the
long working day. Otherwise they have no opportunity for a thorough rest
and the poisons of fatigue are not thrown off. If these poisons are not
eliminated, they accumulate in the system and finally result in physical
breakdown.

And not only is this free day important on the score of health, but it is
also the time for recreation and the strengthening of family ties. For
the girl who has no leisure, no time for real relaxation and play, there
is only a starved and empty existence. A woman who has no opportunity
to be with and to know her children, who must leave them to the care of
friends or a day nursery or the street, who has no day in the week to be
at home with them, can hardly be a potent factor in shaping their lives.
She suffers and so do the children, and the stability of such a family
life is at best uncertain. One woman said, “If I get a half day off on
Sunday to be with my children, it makes me happy all the week.”


[Illustration:

  |UUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUU
  |XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
  |OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
  |      |      |      |      |
  |     10%    20%    30%    40%

  _KEY_
  U under 21 years
  X 21 and under 30 years
  O 30 years and over

DIAGRAM 7.—Ages of Women Restaurant Workers Employed Over 54 Hours
Weekly.]

[Illustration:

  |UUUUUUUUUUUUUUU
  |XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
  |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
  |     10%    20%    30%    40%    50%    60%    70%    80%    90%

  _KEY_
  U foreign
  X American

DIAGRAM 8.—Nationality of Women Restaurant Workers Employed Over 54
Hours Weekly.]


THE LONG-DAY WORKERS.

Who are the workers that bear the brunt of the long hours in restaurants?
They are for the most part the younger women and girls—those who are most
likely to be injured by overstrain. They are the very ones whom it is to
society’s interest to protect most carefully since by their strength is
measured the strength of the next generation. Less than thirty per cent.
of all workers exceeding fifty-four hours a week are over thirty years of
age. (See Diagram 7.)

Foreign-born women also make up the greater part of this group. (See
Diagram 8.) They do not know how to protect themselves from employers’
unreasonable demands, they must have work and they are not trained for
anything except unskilled labor. They will work any number of hours
exacted by the employer whatever the cost, until exhaustion renders them
unfit for labor of any kind.




WAGES.


WEEKLY WAGES.

The wage of restaurant workers is of immediate interest to everyone who
enters a restaurant. You not only pay for your food, but your tip helps
to pay the waitress’s salary. It is upon this source of income that she
depends for the greater part of her earnings. Any study of wages in this
branch of industry must take into consideration not only that tips form a
large part of the income of waitresses but that the majority of women get
all their meals at the restaurant, or the equivalent of $3.00 a week in
addition to actual wages.[7] Professor Streightoff has fixed upon $9.00
a week as the minimum amount upon which a girl can live independently in
New York City.[8] Eighty-seven per cent of all women restaurant workers
are being paid less than $9.00, but when food and tips are estimated and
added, the proportion receiving less than a living wage is thirty-one
per cent. While it is true therefore that the majority of workers in
restaurants are earning enough to support themselves, it is a matter for
grave concern that so large a number of women are being forced below the
lowest point at which they can maintain health and decency.

Moreover this $9.00 a week minimum does not allow for saving against
illness, dentist’s bills, unemployment or any other emergency. Taking
$10.00 a week as the least upon which a girl can live and save, we find
that forty-nine per cent. of these women are receiving in actual wages or
their equivalent less than this amount. A few restaurant workers live at
their place of employment, thus receiving lodging as well as board, but
as this is true of only four per cent., the proportion is too small to
affect appreciably the wage scale as a whole.

It is upon the kitchen and pantry hands who make up twenty-eight per
cent. of all the workers that the burden of low wages falls most heavily.
Waitresses have the opportunity to make tips, cooks receive comparatively
fair wages because their work requires a certain amount of skill, but
the other women cannot make tips and their unskilled labor is very poorly
paid. One-third are receiving less than $6.00 a week, and three-fourths
less than $7.00. (See Diagram 9.)

[Illustration:

  All workers |UUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUU 43%
              |XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 50%
              |OOO 7%

  Waitresses  |UUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUU 58%
              |XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 38%
              |O 2%

  Cooks       |UUUUU 9%
              |XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 59%
              |OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 32%

  Helpers     |UUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUU 33%
              |XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 65%
              |O 2%

  U under $6
  X $6 and under $10
  O $10 and over

DIAGRAM 9.—Weekly Wages of Women Employed in Restaurants.]

The income of a restaurant worker is not clear gain. Certain expenses are
involved in the work which she must meet herself. In restaurants where
a special dress is required the waitress must provide her own uniforms,
and she must also either wash them herself, or pay for having them
laundered. Two clean uniforms a week is the usual requirement and in some
cases three. The report of the United States Labor Department estimates
that it costs a girl about $0.63 a week for the laundering of her aprons
alone.[9] It costs $0.25 to have a uniform laundered, which means $1.13
must be deducted from the $3.50 a week usually paid to waitresses in
tea-rooms, where special dresses are always required. In one New York
tea-room the girls must have two sets of uniforms, a white dress with
white shoes, and a blue dress with black shoes. Each uniform costs $2.50.

Fines also eat into the restaurant worker’s earnings. Girls are commonly
fined for lateness, one particular restaurant exacting $0.25 if a girl
is ten minutes late. Her pay is always cut for breakage, and in some
places a certain amount is deducted weekly whether she breaks any dishes
or not. Also, mistakes in adding up checks, either over or under the
correct amount, and mistakes in orders, must be paid for by the waitress.
“Those are the things that make the girls mad,” said one. In one New York
tea-room this summer, a customer was served with hot coffee, when she had
asked for iced tea, the waitress misunderstanding the order. The mistake
was corrected and the iced tea substituted. When the waitress brought the
customer her check, however, both tea and coffee were charged, and the
girl laid down twenty cents upon the table. “You know, we have to pay for
our mistakes,” she said.

What low wages mean in actual living cannot be expressed by figures.
Poor quarters in questionable parts of the city, clothing of the
most utilitarian kind, no money for the pretty things that every
well-constituted girl wants, nothing for recreation, and worst of all,
debts after illness or unemployment which take the very heart out of
a girl in the bitter struggle to pay them off. The proprietor of a
Buffalo employment agency remarked, “Look at the Wants Ads; with the many
factories in Buffalo you will find the list “Help Wanted for Restaurants”
equals that of “Help Wanted for Factory Work,” and what does that
mean?—Simply that the restaurant workers are a discontented lot and all
because of the excessively long hours and low wages.”


[Illustration: DIAGRAM 10.-Comparison of Weekly Wages (black line) and
Weekly Income (dotted line) of Waitresses in Restaurants.]


THE TIPPING SYSTEM.

Tipping is a direct drag upon wages. When the public is perfectly willing
to contribute part of a waitress’s wage, why should not the employer take
advantage of this fact and pay her less? That is surely to be expected
and is almost universally the case. Many girls, accustomed to making a
good deal in tips or “scale,” as they call it, would not be willing to
work for $9.00 a week and no tips, for they can often make more than this
amount. But the better class of girl would prefer a living wage and no
tips. As matters stand now, however, they are a very necessary part of a
girl’s income.

Comparing the weekly wage and the weekly income of waitresses as shown
in Diagram 10, we find that without tips only 8 per cent. make as much
as $9.00 a week, while with tips 50 per cent. receive $9.00 or more.
The custom of tipping has two distinct disadvantages. First, it is an
unreliable source of income. A girl may reasonably expect to make a
certain amount in tips, but she cannot count upon doing so. The danger
here is not only that she will receive less than it is possible for
her to live on, but that she will get into debt, trusting to luck that
her tips will be large enough to get her out. It is very easy to be
over-confident. A tea-room waitress said: “Sometimes I make $12.00 a week
in tips, sometimes almost nothing. You can’t depend on people.” Tea-rooms
are the greatest sinners in respect to making their waitresses depend
upon tips. The usual wage in several of the well-known New York tea-rooms
is $3.50 a week for full time, which is ten or twelve hours a day.

The other aspect of tipping presents a more subtle danger. The girls need
the money and they deliberately work for it, partly by good service, and
partly by adopting an intimate personal tone toward their men customers.
This leads naturally to familiarity on the man’s part and establishes a
personal relation between them. Most of the girls quite frankly admit
making “dates” with strange men. In one restaurant a woman was pointed
out in incredulous admiration by the other waitresses. “Her husband has
been dead four years, and she hasn’t gone out with a man yet,” they said.
These “dates” are made with no thought on the part of the girl beyond
getting the good time which she cannot afford herself, but the outcome
is often a tragedy. The restaurants in one city of the state forbid
unnecessary conversation between waitress and customer because conditions
resulting from the practice became so flagrant. The result of this
custom is that girls are approached to whom any attention from their men
customers is most distasteful. The report of the United States Bureau of
Labor Statistics says: “Many of the waitresses complain of the annoying
attention of male customers. Many girls said, however, that if they speak
sharply to a customer or offend him, they are likely to be reprimanded by
the head waitress and may even lose their position.”[10]

The Juvenile Protective Association of Chicago considers tipping a
vicious system. “The giving of tips should be abolished because of their
pernicious effect. A young girl who under any other circumstances would
not dream of accepting money from a man will accept it in the guise of a
tip. In the hands of a vicious man this tip establishes between him and
the girl a relation of subserviency and patronage which may easily be
made the beginning of improper attentions. The most conscientious girl,
dependent upon tips to eke out her slender wage, finds it difficult to
determine just where the line of propriety is crossed. Thus, in addition
to the other dangers surrounding the girls employed in hotels and
restaurants, they encounter the lack of respect which curiously attaches
itself to one who accepts a gratuity.”[11]

[Illustration:

  +------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                            |
  | no time unemployed             XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 45% |
  | less than 2 weeks              XXXXXXX 14%                 |
  | 2 weeks and less than 1 month  XXXXXX 13%                  |
  | 1 month and less than 3 months XXXXXXXX 15%                |
  | 3 months and over              XXXXXX 13%                  |
  |                                                            |
  +------------------------------------------------------------+

DIAGRAM 11.—Length of Time Unemployed in Past Year.[12]]


IRREGULARITY OF EMPLOYMENT.

Closely connected with the question of wages is the possibility of being
out of a job. If a girl is earning $10.00 a week she may be able, with
the most careful saving, to lay aside enough to tide her over two or
three weeks of unemployment. But the savings from a $10.00 weekly wage do
not last long. Twenty-eight per cent. of these women were out of work one
month or longer in the past year because of the slack season, illness,
change of their place of employment or for some other reason. The girl
who cannot save is in a desperate condition indeed. For her, prolonged
unemployment means debt, heart breaking anxiety and dependence.

Girls in restaurant work do not get vacations with pay except in very
rare instances. One well-known New York firm having tea-rooms in various
parts of the city, is to be congratulated on the fact that it does give
its waitresses a vacation with pay. A few of the married women, or those
who have families to care for them, can afford to take time out of the
year’s work for a rest. But when a girl is not working, it is for the
most part a matter of stern necessity and inevitably means a time of
struggle and suffering.

Restaurants do not labor under the difficulties of seasonal employment.
We should expect to find a steadiness in this occupation which the facts
do not bear out. It is therefore evident that the instability of the
work and constant shifting is due to the unsatisfactory nature of the
employment itself. The large proportion of workers out of employment for
one month or more a year (20%) is striking evidence of this fact.

[Illustration:

  +---------------------------------------------+
  |                                             |
  | less than 1 year   XXXXXXXXOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO |
  | 10 years and over  XXXXXXXXXXXXOOOOOOOOOOOO |
  |                                             |
  +---------------------------------------------+

  _KEY_
  X less than $6
  O $6 or over

DIAGRAM 12.—Weekly Wages of Women Employed in Restaurants according to
Length of Time in this Occupation.]


LACK OF OPPORTUNITY IN RESTAURANT WORK.

Restaurant work is a “blind alley” trade. There is little opportunity for
development or advancement. What training is necessary can be acquired
in a few weeks, and the only position to which a girl can look forward
is that of head waitress. There are no recognized degrees of skill in
any part of the work connected with a restaurant. On the contrary, the
tendency is in the direction of wearing girls out by overstrain rather
than of giving them a chance. The girls who have been in the work the
shortest time get higher pay than those who have been in it longest.
Sixty-five per cent. of those who had been working less than a year were
getting $6.00 or more a week, while only fifty-five per cent. of those
who had been working over ten years were receiving as much. (See Diagram
12.) The woman who remains in restaurant work for more than a few years
gradually loses her strength and ability, and can get a position only
with an inferior type of restaurant, where the necessity for having a job
forces her to accept whatever wage is offered her.




SUMMARY OF STUDY.


The law has declared illegal the employment of women in mercantile
establishments longer than fifty-four hours or six days in any one week,
on the ground that a working day of more than nine hours, or a working
week of more than six days, is prejudicial to the health of the worker
and therefore to the welfare of society. It has also declared illegal
the employment of these women at night and it safeguards their interests
further by insisting upon a definite period for the mid-day meal.
Fifty-eight per cent. (58%) of the women employed in restaurants exceed
the fifty-four hour limit, twenty per cent. (20%) work twelve hours a day
and four per cent. (4%) are employed at night. One-third do not have one
day of rest in seven, and the majority are not allowed time off for their
meals. Do not these women also need the protection of the law?

Restaurant work has much in common with work in mercantile
establishments. Continuous standing and walking and the nervous strain
entailed in serving many customers are features of both occupations.
Besides this, restaurant work necessitates the lifting and carrying of
heavy weights which may easily be disastrous not only to the worker
herself, but to her children. Dr. Harris has expressly stated his belief
that such work will injure the reproductive organs of a women unless she
is guarded from overstrain. The larger proportion of restaurant workers
are girls and young women, who are peculiarly susceptible to overstrain
because of their youth.

There is abundant evidence from the testimony of the girls themselves
that restaurant work is a severe tax and that the need for limiting
hours of labor is strongly felt among them. Here are quoted a few of the
remarks made by them, which could be duplicated many times:

“I think it’s a shame to let a woman work twelve hours a day. I’m so
tired at night I can’t do anything but go to bed.”

“I can’t keep a job longer than four months because I get so nervous.”

“This is my second week and I’m nearly dead, the hours are so long.”

“It would be the grandest thing in the world if they could do away with
the twelve-hour day.”

To resist the unavoidable strain of the work, the restaurant worker must
be in a normal, healthy state of mind and body. Our responsibility lies
in seeing to it that conditions are such as to make this possible.

The results of fatigue do not end with the individual. It is common
knowledge that health depends upon the power to resist disease. The
person who has overworked is not only subject to the devastating action
of fatigue poisons, but is a prey to any infections to which he may
be exposed because he cannot throw them off. Working conditions which
render large numbers of men and women susceptible to disease, and hence
capable of spreading it, are a public menace. To allow such conditions to
continue unchecked is inexcusable negligence.

These facts point directly to the crying need for the limitation of hours
for women in restaurants, that the individual worker may be protected
from overstrain, that the community may be guarded from the spread of
contagious disease by people predisposed to infection through fatigue,
and that the children of these women may be strong and capable of
becoming useful citizens.

It must be conceded that the difficulty of regulating hours in
restaurants is much greater than in mercantile establishments.
Restaurants must be open for a longer period each day than any store
needs to be or is likely to be. But the difficulties are not insuperable.
By working the employees in shifts of nine consecutive hours a day and
six days a week, and by replacing women by men for night duty, the most
undesirable features of restaurant work would be abolished. Such a plan
has already been tried successfully in a number of New York restaurants,
proving that it is possible and feasible to regulate hours.

To limit by law the hours of labor for women employed in restaurants
cannot be considered a new or revolutionary step. New York is already far
behind the majority of other states in this respect. At the present time,
twenty-seven states regulate the number of hours that women may work in
restaurants, five having the eight-hour day.[13] Clearly, therefore, the
establishment of a normal working day for this class of workers is not
only reasonable, but, in the opinion of the greater number of states, it
is essential to the best welfare of their people as a whole.




RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEGISLATIVE AMENDMENT.


In view of the evidence brought to bear upon the subject, The Consumers’
League wishes to urge the inclusion of women restaurant workers under the
Mercantile Law, the general provisions of which are:

    (1) That the working day shall not exceed nine (9) and the
    working week fifty-four (54) hours.

    (2) That women shall not be employed between the hours of 10 p.
    m. and 7 a. m.

    (3) That there shall be one day of rest in seven, and

    (4) That there shall be a regular time off each day for meals.




APPENDIX I.




A STATEMENT FROM THE LABOR DEPARTMENT OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK ADVOCATING
THE LIMITATION OF HOURS OF WORK FOR RESTAURANT EMPLOYEES.[14]


At present restaurant employees do not come within the provisions of the
law relative to hours of labor of females, or the day of rest law. To
the casual observer it is very evident that there is no other employment
in which males and females are employed, where the hours of labor are so
long, and where the employees are compelled to be constantly on their
feet. It is admitted that there is no class of work in which so large a
percentage of females is employed. The Legislature has recognized that
the females working in restaurants should be protected to some extent,
by providing in section 17 of the Labor Law that “Every person employing
females—as waitresses in a hotel or restaurant shall provide and maintain
suitable seats” but by the very nature of their work the employees have
no opportunity to use these seats. There seems to be no good reason why
the hours of employment of females in restaurants should not be subject
to law as in mercantile establishments, and that all those employed in
the same should enjoy the benefits of the day of rest law, as they do
in other employments. The evil resulting from restaurants being exempt
from the provisions of the Labor Law relating to hours and day of rest,
is shown in the fact that bakeries and confectionery establishments
have added to their business the serving of sandwiches and lunches, and
endeavor to escape the provisions of the law by claiming that they are
exempt because they are operating a restaurant. This illustrates the
subterfuge to which many employers will resort rather than comply with
the law.

                                                   JAMES L. GERNON,
                                             _Chief Mercantile Inspector_.




APPENDIX II.




EXTRACTS FROM A TENTATIVE REPORT ON THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF WOMEN
EMPLOYEES IN RESTAURANTS, BASED ON A STUDY CONDUCTED BY THE OCCUPATIONAL
CLINIC OF THE HEALTH DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK.


From such opportunities for observation as our clinic study afforded us,
it is safe to say that this occupation is one which may affect the health
of women and in connection with long hours and small wages may combine
to cause an increased existence of sickness among them. The effect of
work that requires standing and running about while carrying loads for
many hours during the day will be particularly marked upon the generative
organs of the woman. The influence of the work in this particular, which
we are unfortunately unable to study, because of the opposition it would
inevitably arouse, leads me to believe that from this standpoint alone,
there is a definite hazard to the child-bearing capacity of the woman.
This is of vital consequence to society as a whole, as well as to the
individual workers, and therefore well justifies every effort to correct
the undesirable conditions that attend this occupation.

                                            LOUIS I. HARRIS,
                                  _Chief, Division of Industrial Hygiene_.




APPENDIX III.




RESTAURANT WORK FROM A WORKER’S POINT OF VIEW.


“A nine hour law would be a very good thing. I think long hours are very
bad for women in restaurants. Most of them have varicose veins and flat
feet, and a large number suffer from stomach trouble. Look at me, I am
strong and healthy, but when I’m through at night, I am just all in. It’s
a dreadful nervous strain.

“Girls have to live on tips. If you tell the boss you can’t make any,
he says you are no good and discharges you. You have to put up with it
or starve. The majority of girls—the better class of waitresses—if they
could get a good living would be glad to do without tips. Of course it
would be a revolution and would require a lot of agitation.

“Girls in restaurant work have greater temptations than most girls.
Advances are always made, especially in certain districts. A great number
go wrong because of so many advances.

“Nothing has ever been done for restaurant workers. The bosses all seem
to think we are a lot of crooks. Waitresses think the same of them. Girls
don’t change their jobs so often because they like to. They get fired,
mostly because the manager just wants to, or the work is too hard and the
place miserable.

“There should be a nine-hour day, and two meals with half an hour allowed
for each. Hours should be arranged consecutively. The best regulation
would be to have girls work in shifts, going on at eight and coming
off at five, or going on at eleven and working until eight. The same
arrangement could be made for the kitchen help.”




APPENDIX IV.


[Illustration: SCHEDULE USED.

    Form 2

    NAME[15]
    Katie Penzel

    ADDRESS
    518 West 3rd St.

    OCCUPATION
    Waitress

    NAME OF RESTAURANT
    [15]Watkins

    ADDRESS
    249 12th Ave.

    KIND OF
    Counter: Tables

    Y’RS AT WORK
    this trade 5
    present firm 18 mos.
    total 6½

    AGE
    26

    CONJ. COND.
    _s._ m. w. d.

    BIRTHPLACE
    Austria

    NATIONALITY OF FATHER
    Austrian

    Y’rs in U. S., in N. Y.
    7

    LIVING COND.
    _with family_, boarding with relatives; friends, furnished room

    Distance from work, car, _walk_, time 30 min.

    REGULARITY OF WORK
    Time idle in last 12 mo. due to slack season
    Change of Work
    V’ction with pay
            without
    Ill
    Other
    Total 0

          |   FIRST WEEK    ||   SECOND WEEK   ||  OVERTIME WEEK  |
          +------+----+-----++------+----+-----++------+----+-----+
    H’RS  |Begin.|End.|Total||Begin.|End.|Total||Begin.|End.|Total|
    MON.  |  8   | 8  | 12  ||  8   | 8  | 12  ||      |    |     |
    TUES. |  8   | 8  | 12  ||  8   | 8  | 12  ||      |    |     |
    WED.  |  8   | 8  | 12  ||  8   | 8  | 12  ||      |    |     |
    THURS.|  8   | 8  | 12  ||  8   | 8  | 12  ||      |    |     |
    FRI.  |  8   | 8  | 12  ||  8   | 8  | 12  ||      |    |     |
    SAT.  |  8   | 8  | 12  ||  8   | 8  | 12  ||      |    |     |
    SUN.  |  8   | 8  | 12  ||  8   | 8  | 12  ||      |    |     |
    TOTAL |      |    | 84  ||      |    | 84  ||      |    |     |

    NO. MEALS A DAY AT REST.
    3

    Time off for meals
    No

    AVERAGE TIME IDLE DURING W’KING H’RS
    None

    OTHER WORK REQUIRED IF NOT BUSY

    ALLOWED TO LEAVE PROMPTLY

    WHEN AND HOW OFTEN DOES OVERTIME WORK OCCUR
    TOTAL D’LY      W’KLY

    SUN. W’KED IN PAST Y’R
    52

    HOLIDAYS OFF IN PAST Y’R
    None

    WAGES PER W’K
    $6.

    TIPS A W’K
    $2.

    OVERTIME PAY

    FINES
    No

    Total w’kly
    Hours
    Wage per w’k

    OTHER POSITION HELD
    No

    NO. TABLES RESP. FOR
    Seat. cap. 14
    No. waited on a day 100
    Distance from kitchen 70 ft.
    No. trips to kitch. a day 200
    Est. am’t walked a day 5 miles

    KIND OF SHOES WORN
    High heeled

    KIND OF FLOOR
    Wood

    W’GHT OF TRAY
    Heavy

    EFFECT ON HEALTH
    “Sore feet and a mean disposition.”

    DATE
    2/23/’16

    CITY
    N.Y.C.

    INVESTIGATOR
    M. E. N.

    SOURCE OF INFORMATION
    Restaurant.




APPENDIX V.


TABLE 1.

Age of Women Employed in Restaurants, by Occupation.

  =====================+==========+==========+==========+===============
                       |Waitresses|  Cooks   | Helpers  |     Total
                       |          |          |          |  at each age
           Age         +---+------+---+------+---+------+--------+------
                       |No.| Per  |No.| Per  |No.| Per  |  No.   | Per
                       |   | Cent |   | Cent |   | Cent |        | Cent
  ---------------------+---+------+---+------+---+------+--------+------
  14 and under 16 years|  2|   .3 |...|  ... |...|  ... |   2    |   .2
  16 and under 21 years| 77| 15.0 | 38| 21.0 |130| 48.0 | 245    | 25.0
  21 and under 30 years|288| 55.0 | 54| 29.4 | 87| 32.0 | 429    | 44.0
  30 and under 40 years|127| 24.0 | 46| 25.1 | 35| 13.0 | 208    | 21.2
  40 and under 50 years| 25|  4.7 | 37| 20.2 | 15|  5.3 |  77    |  8.0
  50 and under 60 years|  4|  1.0 |  8|  4.3 |  3|  1.0 |  15    |  1.4
  60 years and over    |...|  ... |...|  ... |  2|   .7 |   2    |   .2
  ---------------------+---+------+---+------+---+------+--------+------
      Total            |523|100.00|183|100.00|272|100.00| 978[16]|100.00
  ---------------------+---+------+---+------+---+------+--------+------


TABLE 2.

Age of Women Employed in Restaurants, by Nationality.

  =================+=======+=======+=======+=======+
                   |14 and |16 and |21 and |30 and |
     Nationality   | under | under | under | under |
                   |16 y’rs|21 y’rs|30 y’rs|40 y’rs|
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
  American         |  ...  |   48  |  156  |   81  |
  Austro-Hungarian |   1   |  155  |  137  |   55  |
  Danish           |  ...  |  ...  |    4  |  ...  |
  Dutch            |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |
  Eng. and Canadian|  ...  |  ...  |   16  |   12  |
  French           |  ...  |  ...  |    1  |    1  |
  German           |   1   |    6  |   36  |   20  |
  Greek            |  ...  |    1  |  ...  |  ...  |
  Irish            |  ...  |    3  |   27  |   22  |
  Italian          |  ...  |  ...  |    2  |    3  |
  Polish           |  ...  |    8  |    9  |    3  |
  Russian          |  ...  |   19  |   14  |    1  |
  Scandinavian     |  ...  |    1  |    5  |    4  |
  Scotch           |  ...  |  ...  |    1  |    1  |
  Swiss            |  ...  |    1  |    1  |  ...  |
  West Indian      |  ...  |  ...  |    2  |    3  |
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
      Total        |   2   |  242  |  411  |  206  |
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

  =================+=======+=======+=======+===========
                   |40 and |50 and |60 y’rs|   Total
     Nationality   | under | under |  and  |  in each
                   |50 y’rs|60 y’rs| over  |Nationality
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-----------
  American         |  26   |   3   |  ...  |  314
  Austro-Hungarian |  18   |   4   |  ...  |  370
  Danish           |   1   |  ...  |  ...  |    5
  Dutch            |   2   |  ...  |  ...  |    2
  Eng. and Canadian|   1   |   2   |  ...  |   31
  French           |   2   |   1   |  ...  |    5
  German           |  12   |   1   |  ...  |   76
  Greek            |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    1
  Irish            |  11   |   3   |   2   |   68
  Italian          |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    5
  Polish           |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |   20
  Russian          |   2   |   1   |  ...  |   37
  Scandinavian     |   1   |  ...  |  ...  |   11
  Scotch           |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    2
  Swiss            |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    2
  West Indian      |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    5
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-----------
      Total        |  76   |  15   |   2   |  954[17]
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-----------


TABLE 3.

Age of Women Employed in Restaurants, by Conjugal Condition.

  =====================+======+=======+=======+=========+===========
                       |      |       |       |Separated|   Total
           Age         |Single|Married|Widowed|   or    |at each age
                       |      |       |       |Divorced |
  ---------------------+------+-------+-------+---------+-----------
  14 and under 16 years|   2  |  ...  |  ...  |   ...   |      2
  16 and under 21 years| 226  |   12  |    2  |    1    |    241
  21 and under 30 years| 235  |  153  |   19  |   12    |    419
  30 and under 40 years|  42  |   97  |   53  |   14    |    206
  40 and under 50 years|   8  |   40  |   26  |    3    |     77
  50 and under 60 years| ...  |    4  |    9  |    2    |     15
  60 years and over    |   1  |  ...  |    1  |   ...   |      2
  ---------------------+------+-------+-------+---------+-----------
      Total            | 514  |  306  |  110  |   32    |    962[18]
  ---------------------+------+-------+-------+---------+-----------


TABLE 4.

Age of Women Employed in Restaurants, by Living Condition.

  =====================+============================================+=====
                       |                Living with                 |Total
                       +------+---------+-------+--------+----------+ at   
  Age                  |Family|Relatives|Friends|Furnis’d|Proprietor|each
                       |      |         |       |  Room  |          |age
  ---------------------+------+---------+-------+--------+----------+-----
  14 and under 16 years|   1  |   ...   |  ...  |    1   |    ...   |   2
  16 and under 21 years|  82  |    78   |   59  |   18   |     6    | 243
  21 and under 30 years| 198  |    74   |   62  |   64   |    16    | 414
  30 and under 40 years|  92  |    37   |   24  |   36   |    10    | 199
  40 and under 50 years|  45  |     5   |    4  |   17   |     4    |  75
  50 and under 60 years|  11  |     2   |  ...  |    1   |    ...   |  14
  60 years and over    | ...  |   ...   |  ...  |    2   |    ...   |   2
  ---------------------+------+---------+-------+--------+----------+-----
      Total            | 429  |   196   |  149  |  139   |    36    | 949
                       |      |         |       |        |          | [19]
  ---------------------+------+---------+-------+--------+----------+-----


TABLE 5.

Age of Women Employed in Restaurants, by Weekly Hours of Labor.

  ======================+=======+=======+=======+=======+
  Weekly Hours of Labor |14 and |16 and |21 and |30 and |
                        | under | under | under | under |
                        |16 y’rs|21 y’rs|30 y’rs|40 y’rs|
                        |       |       |       |       |
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
  54 hours and under    |   2   |   77  |  193  |  109  |
  55 and under 65 hours |  ...  |   67  |   85  |   22  |
  65 and under 75 hours |  ...  |   47  |   76  |   32  |
  75 and under 85 hours |  ...  |   41  |   58  |   34  |
  85 and under 95 hours |  ...  |    5  |   14  |   10  |
  95 and under 105 hours|  ...  |    5  |    3  |  ...  |
  105 hours and over    |  ...  |    3  |  ...  |    1  |
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
      Total             |   2   |  245  |  429  |  208  |
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

  ======================+=======+=======+=======+========
  Weekly Hours of Labor |40 and |50 and |60 y’rs| Total
                        | under | under |  and  |in each
                        |50 y’rs|60 y’rs| over  | hour
                        |       |       |       | group
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------
  54 hours and under    |  27   |   6   |   1   | 415
  55 and under 65 hours |  12   |   3   |  ...  | 189
  65 and under 75 hours |  15   |   1   |  ...  | 171
  75 and under 85 hours |  14   |   4   |   1   | 152
  85 and under 95 hours |   5   |  ...  |  ...  |  34
  95 and under 105 hours|   2   |   1   |  ...  |  11
  105 hours and over    |   2   |  ...  |  ...  |   6
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------
      Total             |  77   |  15   |   2   | 978[20]
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------


TABLE 6.

Weekly Hours of Labor of Women Employed in Restaurants by Occupation.

  =====================+===========+===========+===========+=============
                       |Waitresses |   Cooks   |  Helpers  |Total in each
                       |           |           |           | hour group
  Weekly Hours of Labor+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------
                       | No. |Per  | No. |Per  | No. |Per  | No. | Per
                       |     |Cent |     |Cent |     |Cent |     | Cent
  ---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------
  Under 15 hours       |   6 | 1.0 | ... | ... |   1 |   .3|   7 |    .7
  15 and under 25 h’rs |  75 | 14.0|   1 |   .5|   7 |  2.4|  83 |   8.1
  25 and under 35 h’rs |  89 | 16.2|   1 |   .5|  22 |  7.5| 112 |  11.0
  35 and under 45 h’rs |  45 |  8.2|   7 |  4.0|  13 |  4.5|  65 |   6.3
  45 and under 55 h’rs | 100 | 18.2|  17 |  9.0|  42 | 15.0| 159 |  16.0
  55 and under 65 h’rs |  78 | 14.2|  34 | 18.0|  85 | 30.1| 197 |  19.3
  65 and under 75 h’rs |  68 | 12.4|  51 | 27.0|  64 | 23.0| 183 |  18.0
  75 and under 85 h’rs |  73 | 13.3|  49 | 26.0|  36 | 13.0| 158 |  15.5
  85 and under 95 h’rs |  11 |  2.0|  15 |  8.0|   9 |  3.1|  35 |   3.4
  95 and under 105 h’rs|   2 |   .3|   7 |  4.0|   3 |  1.1|  12 |   1.1
  105 hours and over   |   1 |   .2|   5 |  3.0| ... | ... |   6 |    .6
  ---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------
      Total            | 548 |100.0| 187 |100.0| 282 |100.0|1017 | 100.0
  ---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------


TABLE 7.

Weekly Hours of Labor of Women Employed in Restaurants by Nationality.

  =================+=======+=======+=======+=======+
                   |54 h’rs|55 and |65 and |75 and |
     Nationality   |  and  | under | under | under |
                   | under |65 h’rs|75 h’rs|85 h’rs|
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
  American         |  190  |   45  |   38  |   41  |
  Austro-Hungarian |   83  |   88  |   97  |   81  |
  Danish           |    5  |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |
  Dutch            |    1  |  ...  |    1  |  ...  |
  Eng. and Canadian|   19  |    7  |    1  |    3  |
  French           |    2  |    3  |  ...  |  ...  |
  German           |   36  |   14  |   15  |    9  |
  Greek            |    1  |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |
  Irish            |   44  |    5  |    7  |   12  |
  Italian          |    3  |    1  |    1  |    1  |
  Polish           |    5  |    8  |    2  |    2  |
  Russian          |   15  |   10  |    7  |    2  |
  Scandinavian     |    6  |    2  |  ...  |    1  |
  Scotch           |    1  |  ...  |    1  |  ...  |
  Swiss            |    1  |  ...  |  ...  |    1  |
  West Indian      |    2  |    1  |    1  |  ...  |
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
    Total          |  414  |  184  |  171  |  153  |
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

  =================+=======+=======+=======+===========
                   |85 and |95 and |105 h’s| Total in
     Nationality   | under | under |  and  |   each
                   |95 h’rs|105 h’s| over  |nationality
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-----------
  American         |   4   |   2   |  ...  |  320
  Austro-Hungarian |  18   |   6   |   6   |  379
  Danish           |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    5
  Dutch            |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    2
  Eng. and Canadian|   2   |   1   |  ...  |   33
  French           |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    5
  German           |   2   |  ...  |  ...  |   76
  Greek            |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    1
  Irish            |   1   |   1   |  ...  |   70
  Italian          |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    6
  Polish           |   3   |  ...  |  ...  |   20
  Russian          |   3   |  ...  |  ...  |   37
  Scandinavian     |  ...  |   2   |  ...  |   11
  Scotch           |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    2
  Swiss            |  ...  |  ...  |  ...  |    2
  West Indian      |   1   |  ...  |  ...  |    5
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-----------
    Total          |  34   |  12   |   6   |  974[21]
  -----------------+-------+-------+-------+-----------


TABLE 8.

Weekly Wages of Women Employed in Restaurants by Occupation.

  ===============+===========+===========+===========+===============
                 |Waitresses |   Cooks   |  Helpers  |Total in each
                 |           |           |           | wage group
    Weekly Wage  +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------+-------
                 | No. |Per  | No. |Per  | No. |Per  |  No.  | Per
                 |     |Cent |     |Cent |     |Cent |       | Cent
  ---------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------+-------
  Under $1       |   1 |   .1| ... | ... | ... | ... |  1    |    .1
  $1 and under $2|   1 |   .1| ... | ... | ... | ... |  1    |    .1
   2 and under  3|  10 |  1.8| ... | ... | ... | ... | 10    |   1.0
   3 and under  4|  74 | 14.0|   1 |   .5|  21 |  7.6| 96    |  10.0
   4 and under  5| 107 | 20.2|   4 |  2.1|  19 |  7.0| 130   |  13.2
   5 and under  6| 119 | 23.0|  11 |  6.0|  51 | 18.5| 181   |  18.3
   6 and under  7| 107 | 20.2|  15 |  8.1| 119 | 43.4| 241   |  25.0
   7 and under  8|  65 | 12.2|  35 | 19.0|  52 | 19.0| 152   |  15.3
   8 and under  9|  26 |  5.0|  36 | 20.0|   7 |  2.5|  69   |   6.0
   9 and under 10|   8 |  1.5|  22 | 12.0| ... | ... |  30   |   3.0
  10 and over    |  10 |  1.9|  60 | 32.3|   5 |  2.0|  75   |   8.0
  ---------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------+-------
     Total       | 528 |100.0| 184 |100.0| 274 |100.0|986[22]| 100.0
  ---------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------+-------


TABLE 9.

Weekly Income of Women Employed in Restaurants by Occupation.

  ===============+==========+=====+=======+========
   Weekly Income |Waitresses|Cooks|Helpers| Total
  ---------------+----------+-----+-------+--------
  Under $1       |     2    | ... |  ...  |   2
  $1 and under $2|     2    | ... |  ...  |   2
   2 and under  3|     2    | ... |  ...  |   2
   3 and under  4|    16    |   1 |   21  |  38
   4 and under  5|    24    |   4 |   19  |  47
   5 and under  6|    47    |  11 |   51  | 109
   6 and under  7|    51    |  15 |  119  | 185
   7 and under  8|    61    |  35 |   52  | 148
   8 and under  9|    59    |  36 |    7  | 102
   9 and under 10|    60    |  22 |  ...  |  82
  10 and under 15|   129    |  51 |    5  | 185
  15 and under 25|    73    |   9 |  ...  |  82
  25 and over    |     7    | ... |  ...  |   7
  ---------------+----------+-----+-------+--------
      Total      |   533    | 184 |  274  | 991[23]
  ---------------+----------+-----+-------+--------


TABLE 10.

Wages of Women employed in Restaurants Showing Length of Time Idle during
Preceding Year by Reason of Slack Season, Change of Work, Vacation with
or Without Pay, Illness or Other Causes.

  ================+=========+=======+=========+=========+=========+
                  | No time | Under | 2 weeks | 1 month |2 months |
     Weekly Wage  |  idle   |2 weeks|and under|and under|and under|
                  |         |       |1 month  |2 months |3 months |
  ----------------+---------+-------+---------+---------+---------+
  Under $2        |    1    |  ...  |  ...    |  ...    |  ...    |
  $2 and under $3 |    1    |    1  |    1    |    2    |    2    |
   3 and under  4 |   25    |   10  |   10    |    8    |    4    |
   4 and under  5 |   34    |   10  |   15    |    4    |    7    |
   5 and under  6 |   45    |   13  |   14    |   14    |    7    |
   6 and under  7 |   76    |   25  |   29    |   11    |   13    |
   7 and under  8 |   52    |   19  |   13    |    8    |   10    |
   8 and under  9 |   26    |    7  |    6    |    4    |    3    |
   9 and under 10 |   14    |    5  |    1    |    1    |    1    |
  10 and over     |   36    |    6  |    8    |    5    |  ...    |
  ----------------+---------+-------+---------+---------+---------+
      Total       |  310    |   96  |   97    |   57    |   47    |
  ----------------+---------+-------+---------+---------+---------+

  ================+=========+=========+=========+========+=========
                  |3 months |4 months |5 months |6 months|Total in
     Weekly Wage  |and under|and under|and under|and over|each wage
                  |4 months |5 months |6 months |        | group
  ----------------+---------+---------+---------+--------+---------
  Under $2        |  ...    |  ...    |  ...    |  ...   |    1
  $2 and under $3 |  ...    |  ...    |  ...    |  ...   |    7
   3 and under  4 |    7    |    1    |    2    |    8   |   75
   4 and under  5 |    5    |    2    |    1    |    6   |   84
   5 and under  6 |    6    |    1    |    1    |    5   |  106
   6 and under  7 |    9    |  ...    |    6    |    5   |  174
   7 and under  8 |    4    |    1    |  ...    |    7   |  114
   8 and under  9 |    1    |  ...    |    1    |    1   |   49
   9 and under 10 |  ...    |    1    |    1    |  ...   |   24
  10 and over     |    3    |    1    |  ...    |    6   |   65
  ----------------+---------+---------+---------+--------+---------
      Total       |   35    |    7    |   12    |   38   |  699[24]
  ----------------+---------+---------+---------+--------+---------


TABLE 11.

Weekly Wage of Women Employed in Restaurants by Nationality.

  ====================+=====+======+======+======+======+======+======+
                      |Under|$1 and|$2 and|$3 and|$4 and|$5 and|$6 and|
      Nationality     | $1  |under |under |under |under |under |under |
                      |     |  $2  |  $3  |  $4  |  $5  |  $6  |  $7  |
  --------------------+-----+------+------+------+------+------+------+
  American            |  1  |  1   |  6   |  45  |  49  |  78  |  54  |
  Austro-Hungarian    | ... | ...  | ...  |  22  |  24  |  40  | 115  |
  Danish              | ... | ...  | ...  |   2  |   1  |   1  | ...  |
  Dutch               | ... | ...  | ...  | ...  | ...  |   1  | ...  |
  English and Canadian| ... | ...  | ...  |   4  |  10  |   7  |   6  |
  French              | ... | ...  | ...  | ...  |   1  |   1  |   1  |
  German              | ... | ...  | ...  |  11  |  14  |  10  |  13  |
  Greek               | ... | ...  | ...  | ...  | ...  | ...  | ...  |
  Irish               | ... | ...  |  2   |   6  |  19  |  13  |  18  |
  Italian             | ... | ...  | ...  | ...  |   1  |   1  |   3  |
  Polish              | ... | ...  | ...  |   1  | ...  |   3  |   6  |
  Russian             | ... | ...  | ...  |   1  |   1  |   9  |  15  |
  Scandinavian        | ... | ...  | ...  |   1  |   3  |   2  |   1  |
  Scotch              | ... | ...  | ...  | ...  | ...  |   1  | ...  |
  Swiss               | ... | ...  | ...  | ...  | ...  |   1  | ...  |
  West Indian         | ... | ...  | ...  | ...  |   1  |   1  |   2  |
  --------------------+-----+------+------+------+------+------+------+
      Total           |  1  |  1   |  8   |  93  | 124  | 169  | 234  |
  --------------------+-----+------+------+------+------+------+------+

  ====================+======+======+======+=======+===========
                      |$7 and|$8 and|$9 and|$10 and|   Total
      Nationality     |under |under |under | over  |  in each
                      |  $8  |  $9  | $10  |       |Nationality
  --------------------+------+------+------+-------+-----------
  American            |  35  |  16  |   7  |  15   |    307
  Austro-Hungarian    |  70  |  34  |  20  |  47   |    372
  Danish              |   1  | ...  | ...  | ...   |      5
  Dutch               |   1  | ...  | ...  | ...   |      2
  English and Canadian|   1  |   3  | ...  |   1   |     32
  French              |   2  | ...  | ...  | ...   |      5
  German              |  15  |   2  |   1  |   8   |     74
  Greek               |   1  | ...  | ...  | ...   |      1
  Irish               |   8  |   3  | ...  | ...   |     69
  Italian             |   1  | ...  | ...  | ...   |      6
  Polish              |   9  | ...  |   1  | ...   |     20
  Russian             |   2  |   5  |   1  |   3   |     37
  Scandinavian        |   2  |   2  | ...  | ...   |     11
  Scotch              |   1  | ...  | ...  | ...   |      2
  Swiss               |   1  | ...  | ...  | ...   |      2
  West Indian         | ...  | ...  | ...  | ...   |      4
  --------------------+------+------+------+-------+-----------
      Total           | 150  |  65  |  30  |  74   |    949[25]
  --------------------+------+------+------+-------+-----------




APPENDIX VI.


STATES HAVING LAWS REGULATING WORK OF WOMEN EMPLOYED IN RESTAURANTS.

Verified by U. S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

HOURS

    ----------------------------------------
    Hours in  Hours in
    one day   one week       State
    ----------------------------------------
        8        48     California
        8        48     District of Columbia
        8        56     Arizona
        8               Colorado
        8               Washington
                 54     Maine
        9        54     Missouri
        9        54     Nebraska
        9        54     Texas
        9        54     Utah
        9               Idaho
        9               Montana
        9               Oklahoma[26]
       10        54     Michigan
       10        54     Ohio
       10        54     Pennsylvania
       10        55     Wisconsin[27]
       10        56     Wyoming
       10        58     Minnesota
       10        60     Kentucky
       10        60     Louisiana
       10        60     Mississippi
       10        60     New Jersey
       10        60     Oregon
       10               Illinois
       10¼       55     New Hampshire[27]
       10½       57     Tennessee
    ----------------------------------------
         To be determined by Industrial
              Welfare Commission.
    ----------------------------------------
                        Arkansas
                        Kansas
    ----------------------------------------


ONE DAY OF REST IN SEVEN REQUIRED.

    California[28]
    District of Columbia
    New Jersey
    Pennsylvania


NIGHT WORK FORBIDDEN.

    For all females
      Nebraska

    For females under 18
      Arizona
      California[29]
      District of Columbia
      Louisiana
      New Hampshire
      California
      Colorado

    For females under 21
      Ohio
      Pennsylvania

Not more than 48 hours in one week

    For all females
      New Hampshire
      Wisconsin


MINIMUM WAGE REQUIRED

    Utah

To be determined by Industrial Welfare Commission

    Arkansas
    California
    Colorado
    Kansas
    Massachusetts
    Minnesota[30]
    Nebraska
    Oregon
    Washington
    Wisconsin


MEAL TIME REQUIRED

    Arizona
    Louisiana
    Maine
    Minnesota
    New Hampshire
    New Jersey
    Ohio
    Pennsylvania
    Wisconsin
    Wyoming


SEATS REQUIRED

    Arizona
    Arkansas
    California
    District of Columbia
    Idaho
    Indiana
    Kansas
    Kentucky
    Louisiana
    Maine
    Maryland
    Michigan
    Minnesota
    Missouri
    Montana
    Nebraska
    New York
    North Carolina
    Ohio
    Oklahoma
    Oregon
    Pennsylvania
    South Dakota
    Texas
    Utah
    Vermont
    Washington


TIPS FORBIDDEN

    Arkansas
    Iowa
    Mississippi
    South Carolina




FOOTNOTES


[1] See Appendix I.

[2] Women and Child Wage-earners in the United States, Vol. V., Chap. X.

[3] Dishwashers, silver cleaners, tray girls, cashiers, laundry workers
and pantry hands are included in this term.

[4] 13th U. S. Census, 1910. Vol. VIII, Manufactures, p. 314.

[5] Women and Child Wage-earners in the United States, Vol. V, p. 199.

[6] The Girl Employed in Hotels and Restaurants. Juvenile Protective
Association of Chicago, 1912.

[7] Report of the State Factory Investigating Commission for 1915, Vol.
IV, p. 1593.

[8] _Ibid._, p. 1609.

[9] Women and Child Wage-earners, Vol. V, p. 362.

[10] Women and Child Wage-earners in the United States, Vol. V, p. 199.

[11] The Girl Employed in Hotels and Restaurants. Juvenile Protective
Association of Chicago, 1912.

[12] 30% of the workers interviewed had just begun work or did not report
on this point, so they have not been included in these figures.

[13] See Appendix VI.

[14] Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor, 1914.

[15] Fictitious names used.

[16] Exclusive of 39 women who did not report on this point.

[17] Exclusive of 63 women who did not report on this point.

[18] Exclusive of 55 women who did not report on this point.

[19] Exclusive of 68 women who did not report on this point.

[20] Exclusive of 39 women who did not report on this point.

[21] Exclusive of 43 women who did not report on this point.

[22] Exclusive of 31 women who did not report on this point.

[23] Exclusive of 26 women who did not report on this point.

[24] Exclusive of 318 women who did not report on this point.

[25] Exclusive of 68 women who did not report on this point.

[26] In cases of emergency 10 hours a day are allowed if not less than
double for overtime is paid.

[27] Has an 8 and 48 hour law for night work.

[28] Except in cases of emergency.

[29] Except in cases of emergency.

[30] Not now in force—pending Supreme Court decision.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEHIND THE SCENES IN A
RESTAURANT ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
